But actually, Ellen, a lot of people are moving back into the country.
Young people, an amazing number of young people.
How long ago?
And how come the cities continue to grow larger?
Well, a lot of them are losing population.
Are they?
Well.
Which ones?
New York City is losing.
Little one is losing.
Area is losing.
Yes, but are they losing population to the country?
Are they losing populations to places like San Diego and Portland and Boise, Idaho?
I don't know.
California is losing population.
There are fewer people coming in now than are leaving it.
But I mean, I know from, partly from what I've read and partly from my own observation,
that old houses, for instance, in the country that were abandoned, have been bought and fixed
up and people are living in them.
The quality of life in the cities is such that they don't see any reason why they have
to live that way.
So they're moving out where there's some clean air and they can have a little garden
patch.
And everybody's got television these days and you have an automobile so that you can
get about.
And all these places are, at least in the east, are within reach of some center where
there are cultural theaters and stores, one thing and another.
If that's the key point, I think, I'd be very interested to see some statistics on how many
people are moving to the country within, say, a radius of a two-hour drive of a large cultural
center.
And there are a lot of books being...
Or how many are moving to the real country?
Way, way out, say, in the wilds of Nevada or Nebraska for that matter.
Well, that isn't country.
That's something else again.
A lot of people, I mean, you know, move to the desert or someplace like that, which is
extremely isolated.
But I'm speaking now of just what you generally call, you know, a farming country.
My ideal situation would be to live in a place like Big Sur or Montana, but be within easy
commuting distance of New York and London and Los Angeles and San Francisco.
You need a much smaller planet.
Yes.
Or a much more efficient transportation system.
Yeah, that is what we really need.
And I've seen designs for them.
Trains that go 300 miles per hour, and you never decelerate the engine.
You accelerate the cars up to the 300 and attach them to the engine and detach them later.
You've got a large mesh network of 300 mile per hour trains and a smaller mesh network
of trains that do 100 and an even smaller mesh of trains that do 30 miles per hour.
And you set up the mesh so that a train is only a five minute walk from anywhere.
Now you map out the area of the country available to you within an hour of traveling.
And even including two five minute walks, it becomes tremendous, much larger than anything
available to us.
In fact, the culture available to a man who has access to that network is a lot greater
than the culture available to a New Yorker, even if the country is spread out with a population
density like Kansas.
I think what we're seeing is not the elimination of cities, but just a change in their function.
Right.
I think they reached the point of megalopolis.
I mean, they couldn't, you know, they were just too big and had to simmer down again.
The subject of huge populations and the attending systems needed to service them brings up a
point which science fiction authors Alan Dean Foster, Lee Brackett and Larry Niven find
fascinating.
It concerns a pollutant and its role in controlling a powerful natural phenomenon.
Larry Niven follows it through.
Anybody here in favor of heat pollution?
Depending on the recovery system, yes.
Yeah, I'm kind of in favor of it tentatively.
We need no more.
But if Mars just went into an ice age, it may be that we just went into an ice age and
it's only heat pollution that is keeping us from the glaciers.
That's an interesting possibility.
I don't know why it would affect one planet and not another.
I mean, presumably we both circle the same sun.
That's what I mean.
And the recent experiments done to detect neutrinos coming from the sun have found far
too few.
It's as if the fusion process inside the sun has stopped for a while.
That could be a frightening thought.
It isn't as if the sun is going to stop shining because it isn't as if it could cool off all
at once.
I'm in favor of good old mother nature being far greater menace to mankind than man is.
Are you?
I think mankind has been the biggest force for evolution on Earth for a long time.
Oh, yes, for evolution.
But what I mean is that the natural disasters that have been visited upon the globe of, as
you were saying, if the sun has cooled down, this is sort of beyond our capacity to do.
If spray cans could wipe out the ozone layer, the volcanoes of the Earth would have wiped
out the ozone layer a lot sooner, Niven's law.
One thing I think Lester mentioned is that science fiction, there was a great deal of
talk about adaptation.
And I think science fiction is the literature of adaptation as opposed to, say, the literature
of reaction.
I agree.
I think the important thing about science fiction right from the beginning is not whether
or not the predictions were accurate in themselves, but that the predictions were made, which
kind of stretched people's minds, some of them, beyond the point where their entire
life was encompassed by getting up in the morning and going to work and going to bed
at night.
And they never thought about anything beyond the next fence post.
The idea of spaceflight, the idea of other worlds, the idea of other forms of life opening
up all this enormous possibility and the conception of atomic power and the conception
of...
Anti-gravity.
Right, anti-gravity.
If you're not going to unload the dice.
Yeah, which hasn't come true yet, but it, who knows, and I notice that they're even
talking about the FTL drivers, so it might just be possible.
Both of these seem unlikely.
Yeah, well, yes, they seem unlikely, but what I'm driving at is that it got people thinking,
which I think is a lot more important than whether Jules Verne's submarine, the Nautilus,
actually could ever have sailed or not.
There were submarines before Jules Verne...
Oh, I'm sure there were.
...and he didn't even include a periscope.
Mm-hmm.
But he did have beautifully upholstered furniture and an organ.
Can't beat that.
Science fiction writers on a whole tend to be very good interior decorators.
Yeah.
As opposed to the spaceships you see on TV, the big message throughout science fiction,
I only found one.
It is there are people who don't think like you do, and they are as right as you are.
Right.
Yeah, science fiction was the only thing I read, or I can remember reading in high school,
that demanded that I think...
Yeah.
There were other stories that made me think, but science fiction was the only thing I read
that said, now think about this or else.
Mm-hmm.
And it was a wonderful discovery.
Anyone want to disagree with Lester and Fred's opinion of man's adaptability?
I don't myself.
No, I think man is enormously adaptable.
And of course, if you want to quibble, I think Fred's contention was that man adapted his
environment to suit himself.
Well, I suppose in other words, you clobber another animal and take his skin rather than
growing for yourself.
You capture wolves and grow them into dogs to protect you instead of attacking you.
Yes, right.
So, I suppose that that's true, but that in itself is pretty much an adaptability trait,
I would think.
Mm-hmm.
In the long run, no, I agree with you.
In the short run, I worry about something called the tyranny of the minority, that our
institutions have developed in such a way that small interest groups can frustrate any
kind of progress.
Well, this is true.
I was speaking merely of man in the sort of primitive state.
In other words, it managed to survive the Ice Age and survive a lot of other things.
In post-atomic times or following, I think any natural calamity, you're still going to
have a certain number of people left who will in some way adapt to whatever they have to
do.
And you, had you given any thought to the tyranny of the majority, Alan?
Yes, yes.
It's kind of hard to think of one without the other.
Yes.
And being in the minority, it's impossible to think of one without the other.
I doubt any Mormon has ever forgotten the possibility.
Mm-hmm.
How about terraforming Mars?
Lee, they keep changing your Mars on you.
How about changing it back, huh?
Well, I would adore doing that.
I don't know that my Mars would be a terribly pleasant place to live either.
It was pretty chilly and windy and dusty, as I recall it, and very much on the ragged
edge.
But the air could be breathed by strong, strong enough people?
Yes, it was a bit thin, but it was breathable, which I believe is actually not over a long
period of time.
Mm-hmm.
My understanding, I may be wrong on that, but you could get away without life support.
All right.
There are ways to make a pleasanter Mars.
Oh, yes, surely there are.
Terraforming Venus has also got its possibilities.
I wouldn't want to bet on that one.
I wouldn't either.
I'm fascinated by the possibility, but I don't know.
I had a character speculating once that what we need to terraform Venus is a big anti-gravity
generator that would send a plume of the atmosphere out into space to be blown away until we're
down to a breathable atmosphere.
Well Carl Sagan's idea was that you seed the atmosphere with algae.
Yeah, this seems easier.
Uh-huh.
The way he put it, it sounded very, very practical.
Yeah, I've seen these plants and sure they look practical, but what have you got when
you finished?
A slightly lighter planet with a quite heavy, thick atmosphere under a quite hot sun, nearby
sun.
Uh, Mars sounds more attractive.
There obviously has been water on the surface, fluid water.
Yeah.
We've got the braided water courses and the erosions.
Arthur Clark spoke of igniting a fusion plant on, say, Phobos, so that you've got a fairly
tiny sun fairly close in as well as the big sun.
Uh-huh.
That would warm up Mars.
You'd get the water melted.
If you need more, it could possibly be imported from Earth or from Saturn's rings.
Uh-huh.
The chief problem's always seen at least according to Edgar Rice Burroughs, who presuppose atmosphere
plants, if you remember, because the light gravity of the planet permits a good bit of
the atmosphere to leak away into space, doesn't hold it.
Of course, he was right as far as that goes.
Yeah, a problem you're always going to have with you.
The problem with Mars is nobody ever built the atmosphere plants yet.
Right.
So, perhaps we'll get to that anyway.
Nobody ever seems to mention Titan in all of these possible discussions.
I think it's going to be very interesting when the, what is it, the latest non-mariner,
but Explorer shoots by on the, perhaps it is Mariner, shoots by after its next flyby,
close by look at Jupiter, and we're supposed to have our first close look at Titan, which
of course has something of an interesting atmosphere.
Yes.
Mm-hmm.
Although it's a bit too far away for comfort.
Yeah, I never studied Titan.
What's interesting about Titan?
Well, that it apparently has an atmosphere which contains water vapor in it and a number
of other things which could prove very useful, and the fact is we just don't know very much
about it.
Mm-hmm.
And the mere fact that it has an atmosphere which is not primarily methane, and that it
does have water vapor in it, opens up a whole host of intriguing possibilities.
Mm-hmm.
As I recall, a Titan is the largest moon in the system, in other words, is larger than
Luna, so it'd be quite habitable if it were habitable.
Genomy is larger than Luna.
Yeah.
There are a number of moons bigger than Luna.
I didn't know Titan was the biggest.
I think so.
For that matter, there's the possibility of, well, but you still have the problem of terraforming
if you put some large fusion motors on something like, well, on one of the smaller moons and
move them closer to the sun.
Well, I have every faith in the advance of technology because when I first started, see,
I'm a lot older than you people are.
And when I went to school, the atom was the smallest indivisible particle of matter which
could never possibly be split.
And I used to worry a great deal when I first started writing science fiction because of
the heavy side layer which forever prohibited radio communication between Earth and a spaceship
in orbit.
And all these things seem to have fallen by the wayside.
Yes.
And sort of today's scientific absolute is tomorrow's, you know, solved problems.
So I think ways will be found to do an awful lot of things.
And oftentimes, if the, even just the theory has been propounded, sometimes you'd have
to wait for the technology to catch up.
Even so, it's not unreasonable to assume that the speed of light barrier can't be cracked.
No.
And you get interesting stories out of that one too.
Yes.
I always have written stories with a lot of action.
And I like interstellar.
I like to get out there and shoot the nebulae and, you know, go into the clusters and all
these things, which to me is part of the whole pleasure of writing science fiction.
This series that I'm doing for Ballantyne now, I've trod around a good bit throughout
the galaxy.
So of course, in a story like that, you use faster than light drives simply because, I
mean, you just say that it's so and you use it.
It's not an integral part of a story.
It's merely a means of getting from point A to point B so that you can get on with your
story because otherwise it would take you several thousand years and everybody'd be,
you know, too old when they got there.
But I notice that very reputable scientists are now beginning to challenge the speed of
light barrier.
This is certainly true.
If the speed of light can be cracked, we're going to do it eventually.
It's just too useful a possibility to ignore.
Same statement applies to gravity, anti-gravity, generated gravity.
Some things are unlikely to be true, but very useful if they are.
That's right.
And very often you find the fallout on the way to finding out, you know, testing it.
Sometimes something happens that's even more useful than your original.
The death ray now has had a lot of fallout.
We never dreamed it would be so useful in so many ways when we spoke of colored beams
of light that would cut through an enemy or an enemy's fortress for that matter.
That Buck Rogers stuff they used to tell me when I was a kid.
Right.
Ridiculous.
Now on the whole, you know, we tend to cling to the things we like in science fiction in
the face of scientific developments unless they've been absolutely disproved.
Your Mars being a good example.
You were saying Larry, that you thought the science fiction writers nowadays know more
than they did then about science.
This is true.
So does the audience.
Yes.
But I mean a lot more is known than when we started out.
Even the newspaper reporters are bright now.
But we made some terrible boobos about atomic power and what would happen if you started
throwing atom bombs around, you know, and we know better now because it's actually
happened.
Yes.
In those days you see you were dealing with something that didn't exist.
I have a hunch someday someone will probably say the same thing about faster than light
drive and anti-gravity.
Probably enough I think one of the great advances in technology that we can look for
in the next 40, 30 years is going to be in the technology of recovery systems, whether
it's waste heat from atomic plants or paper bags.
Whatever our recovery system is, they're going to take energy.
Practically any form of turning garbage into something useful requires energy.
That's why I'm pushing atomic plants.
Well, I'm kind of a solar power above myself.
All right.
The Earth is only getting a certain amount of solar power.
If we put up the O'Neill colonies we will also be able to put up solar power plants
on the moon and beam the energy back to Earth via microwaves.
Aside from that, atomic power is the only kind of power that doesn't originate with
sunlight in one form or another.
That can be used without polluting the atmosphere in one form or another.
The third choice is to burn something, anything.
Oil.
Yeah, solar power of course is...
Well there are other possibilities.
Solar power originates with the sun and fine.
We can use anything that originates with the sun including running rivers.
Yes, there are other possibilities that are waiting for that new technology that hasn't
been discovered yet.
New Zealand, for example, gets approximately 7% of its electrical power from thermal sources.
There's the possibility of...
Geothermal?
Geothermal.
There's the possibility of tapping the Earth's heat for artificial geothermal power.
There are far more efficient hydroelectric systems than we have in this country, but
then we get back to the tyranny of the minority again.
When is hydroelectric power valuable and when is a wild river valuable?
Yeah.
Both clean sources of power.
Yeah, I can name you a clean source of power.
It's the temperature difference between the top of an ocean and the bottom of an ocean.
And I wouldn't think you would be lousing up the environment at all if you started making
electrical energy out of that temperature difference.
Absolutely.
But this again, this all requires technology that hasn't been developed yet to be efficient.
If we could get fusion that was good enough, that would really be it.
Yes, fusion would be nice.
Fusion would be nice.
We're dissociating seawater to get oxygen, which is good, burning the hydrogen for fusion
and getting enormous energy out of it, which is good.
And the result is helium, which we sell for diragibles, right?
Right.
Which is good.
There are things about the diragible that I love.
And here's one.
On an airplane, the problem is people per value.
The closer you pack the people, the more efficient the airplane becomes.
But if you do that on a diragible, it's the mass aboard that counts.
I can see a thin-skinned diragible, maybe a couple of skins, but both very thin and very strong.
And lightweight floors, say foam plastic in spots and some metal cores to hold them together.
And you inflate the whole thing with an oxy-helium mixture, and you don't populate just a gondola underneath,
you populate the whole diragible.
But you can't allow population density to rise so high, so there's endless room throughout this thing.
Disneyland in the sky.
Yeah.
Can they be made rigid enough to...
I don't know.
All I know is our building materials get better and better.
I know.
We get closer and closer to bologna.
Much better alloys than there were.
I remember seeing the Shenandoah when she came out here.
Beautiful, beautiful thing, just incredibly beautiful,
standing there and watching her sail over the Santa Monica's and over the ocean.
And she didn't last long thereafter.
And it seemed they all came to rather sad ends.
There's the Hindenburg saddest of all, but they all seem to go down in storms or break up or something.
They were used to death.
Oh yeah, of course they were.
You keep using a diragible until it breaks over, it goes down in storms.
I suspect that those were the old days before anyone painted plumesal lines on ships.
You remember what that was for?
People would take out vast amounts of insurance and then load their ships to the gunnels.
And if the ships made port fine, if they didn't, there was a big profit in it.
No, the plumesal mark went back a long time before that.
Okay, I was never that much good at history.
But the way of thinking was still there.
There were no consumer protest groups.
Well, I'm of the opinion that, if I were a poet of what Fred and Lester were talking about,
that we have, as far as getting out into space, one of two choices.
I mean, we can either go out and go ahead and keep growing or else we're going to have to pull in our ears on this planet.
The resources are out there.
Just the business of living on the Blohmann thing for all this length of time.
One of the most horrendous experiences I had to seeing what time has done to a place flying down from Baghdad to Basra
and looking down on that land that has been cultivated under irrigation for six, seven, eight thousand years.
And everywhere you look, the whole land is white with a salt scurve and nothing grows on it.
And there's not a Blohmann thing you can do about it because, altering those millennia, the chemicals from the irrigation canals,
have been building up in the soil.
And I see the first hint of that beginning down in the Imperial Valley now when you drive through.
You see these areas of white scurve.
Apparently the water down there is even more saline.
It isn't a matter really of abuse or, oh well good Lord knows we have abuse things, but the earth has an enormous capacity to recover.
And now, new horizons are being explored for mankind's care and survival.
Something Lee Brackett, Alan Dean Foster, Larry Niven, Lester Del Ray, Frederick Poe, and science fiction authors like them have been doing for years.
Music
The Mars that was thought to be very like the moon didn't last very long.
No it didn't. The next mirror that went out there took another look and said,
Found riverbeds, essentially.
I still treasure the hope that when their landing is actually made that some little trace of life will be found.
Somebody will come to greet them on throats.
Someone will come to greet them on throats.
Certainly.
My hope for the Lee Brackett Mars or the Ray Bradbury Mars depends on remaking Mars, not on finding it that way.
It's a fascinating idea.
If the universe isn't the way you like it, there's always fantasy.
Today's science fiction is tomorrow's history.
Music
Man. Earth. The universe. Tomorrow. What's in store?